.TH ATOM-PI 1 "2026-04-14" "Atom‑PI Substrate" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
atom-pi \- invariant primitives for symmetric cryptography

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B atom-pi
.RI [ operation ]
.RI [ options ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Atom‑PI is a deterministic, zero‑magic substrate exposing the minimal
set of operations required to construct symmetric cryptographic
primitives.

It does not implement any named algorithms.  It provides only the
fundamental atoms from which such algorithms can be built:
ARX operations, boolean S‑boxes, byte S‑boxes, linear diffusion,
GF(2^8) and GF(2^128) arithmetic, structural combinators, and
deterministic memory models.

Atom‑PI is intended for designing and experimenting with new
constructions, not for re‑branding existing standardized ciphers
and hashes.

.SH PHILOSOPHY
Atom‑PI enforces the following design principles:

.IP \(bu 3
Every transformation is explicit.
.IP \(bu 3
Every state transition is visible.
.IP \(bu 3
No hidden dependencies or helpers.
.IP \(bu 3
Deterministic, pure, side‑effect‑free atoms.
.IP \(bu 3
Strict 32‑bit and 8‑bit invariants at boundaries.
.IP \(bu 3
Wrappers define structure; Atom‑PI defines atoms.

.SH ATOMS
The substrate is divided into five categories.

.SS Arithmetic / Bit Atoms
.TP
.B wadd(a, b)
32‑bit modular addition.
.TP
.B wxor(a, b)
32‑bit XOR.
.TP
.B wrot(x, n)
32‑bit rotate‑left.
.TP
.B wshr(x, n)
Logical right shift.

.SS Nonlinear Atoms
.TP
.B sbox_boolean(a, b, c, mode)
Boolean S‑box ("ch", "maj").
.TP
.B sbox_byte(x, table)
Byte‑level S‑box using a caller‑supplied table.

.SS Linear‑Mixing Atoms
.TP
.B lmix_word(w0, w1, w2, w3)
Generic linear word mixer.
.TP
.B lmix_perm(state, perm)
Fixed permutation of state words.
.TP
.B lmix_gf256(column)
4‑byte GF(2^8) column mixer.
.TP
.B lmix_quarterround(a, b, c, d)
ARX quarter‑round.
.TP
.B gf_mul(a, b)
Multiplication in GF(2^128).

.SS Structural Atoms
.TP
.B compress(state, block, round_fn, rounds)
Generic compression loop.
.TP
.B expand(message, schedule_fn, count)
Generic schedule/key expansion.
.TP
.B feedback(state, next)
XOR‑based chaining feedback.
.TP
.B feedback_indexed(state, memory, index)
Memory‑indexed feedback.

.SS Memory Atoms
.TP
.B state_small(n)
Allocate fixed‑size word state.
.TP
.B state_large(n)
Allocate large memory region.

.SH NOT IMPLEMENTED
Atom‑PI intentionally does not implement any named cryptographic
primitive.  There is no built‑in SHA‑256, AES, ChaCha, GHASH,
HMAC, KDF, or stream cipher.

All such constructions, standardized or experimental, must be
implemented as separate wrappers that compose Atom‑PI atoms.

.SH EXAMPLES
Typical uses of Atom‑PI include:

.IP \(bu 3
Designing new hash functions from ARX and boolean S‑boxes.
.IP \(bu 3
Experimenting with custom block ciphers and permutations.
.IP \(bu 3
Building educational demos of "good vs bad" crypto pipelines.
.IP \(bu 3
Prototyping memory‑hard constructions using feedback_indexed()
and state_large().

Atom‑PI itself performs no hashing, encryption, or key derivation.

.SH FILES
.I atom-pi.js
The substrate implementation.

.SH AUTHOR
SAL.